The Economics of Recursive Self-Improvement
Tom Cunningham*
Lukas Althoff†

Basil Halperin†

Brian Jabarian†

Andrew Koh†

Arjun Ramani†

Phil Trammell†

Parker Whitfill†

Cheryl Wu†

July 13, 2026

Abstract

We model the economics of recursive self-improvement (RSI) and assess its
plausibility and impacts. First, we build a sequence of increasingly rich models of AI progress to highlight the feedback loops behind RSI. We represent our
models as directed graphs and show that net acceleration in AI capabilities
depends on the product of elasticities across each feedback loop. Second, we
distinguish between “narrow” and “broad” AI capabilities, capturing the possibility that AI systems improve narrowly at optimizing AI R&D benchmarks
without improving at broader economically valuable tasks. Third, we document existing estimates of key parameters, and provide a wish list of empirical objects that AI companies can measure and feasibly share publicly. Finally,
we calibrate the model with existing data. A back-of-the-envelope calculation
suggests that feedback loops are not currently strong enough to generate a selfsustaining acceleration, though they appear to be strengthening. We conclude
by assessing the plausibility and implications of such an acceleration.

Contributions: * Lead author. † Listed in alphabetical order; these authors contributed equally.
Corresponding author: Tom Cunningham, tom.cunningham@metr.org
Latest version of the paper: https://github.com/elasticity-ai/elasticity/raw/main/paper/elasti
city-rsi-paper.pdf
Acknowledgements: Thanks for comments from Anson Ho, Thomas Houlden, Shrey Jain, Whitney Zhang,
Alan Chan, Thomas Kwa, Anton Korinek, Jason Abaluck.
Affiliations: Tom Cunningham (METR); Lukas Althoff (Stanford University); Basil Halperin (University of
Virginia); Brian Jabarian (Carnegie Mellon University and Google AI); Andrew Koh (Columbia University);
Arjun Ramani (MIT); Phil Trammell (Stanford DEL and Epoch AI); Parker Whitfill (METR); Cheryl Wu (Yale
University).
All authors are affiliated with the Elasticity Institute (https://elasticity.institute).
Support: We gratefully acknowledge administrative and financial support from METR, and hosting from
Constellation.

1

1 I NTRODUCTION
Motivation. Over the past year many signs have emerged of a feedback loop in which
AI is accelerating AI research (Favaro and Clark, 2026), implying we could expect an
acceleration in the already rapid growth of AI capabilities.1 If the feedback loops are
as strong as some expect, the transformation in productivity could have consequences
comparable in scale to historical shifts such as the Enlightenment, reshaping economic,
social, and political life (Mokyr, 2002).
Core argument. The degree of acceleration depends on what we call the core feedback
loop: for a one-unit increase in model capabilities, how much do the capabilities of the next
generation of models increase? Estimating the strength of this relationship is challenging
because it is governed by many inputs and possible bottlenecks.
This note presents a series of theoretical models to clarify the forces behind the core
feedback loop. We draw a tight connection to empirical data needed to measure the
strength of the feedback loop, which can help assess the degree of current and future
acceleration.
Defining RSI. The term “recursive self-improvement” (RSI) has been used in several
ways, often inconsistently.2 Some define RSI as a technology contributing to its own
improvement, which could apply to almost any technology since the dawn of humanity.
Favaro and Clark (2026) recently defined the term more narrowly as a technology that
has fully automated the process of its own improvement. Other definitions highlight the
importance of acceleration or feedback loops, even if full automation is not realized.
To avoid confusion, we instead focus on the possibility of a self-sustaining acceleration
in AI capabilities and derive the conditions under which it arises. We begin by defining
self-sustaining acceleration and related terms in Table 1.
Table 1: Definitions
Term

Definition

Feedback loops

When outputs of a system today are routed back as inputs to the system tomorrow. Arguably most technologies exhibit feedback effects f are part of feedback loops
when embedded in the economy), and AI has certainly
exhibited feedback loops for a long time.

1 Measured, for example, via the Epoch Capabilities Index or the METR time horizon metric, though
measuring capabilities remains difficult.
2 The origin of the term is not clear, but it was popularized by (and plausibly originated with) Yudkowsky
(2001, 2008), extending an argument by Good (1965).

2

Table 1: Definitions
Term

Definition

R&D automatability

When AI is able to autonomously make technological improvements at least equivalent to those made by human
researchers, at an equal cost. Automatability does not imply automation: humans could still be employed in R&D
due to slow diffusion or regulation.

Self-sustaining acceleration

When AI systems are sufficient for accelerating
progress in AI capabilities without any growth in exogenous inputs (human labor, training compute, etc.).

Intelligence explosion

When AI capabilities go to infinity in finite time.

Relevant references: Davidson et al. (2026), Chan et al. (2026), Eth and Davidson (2025), Davidson and
Houlden (2025), Davidson (2023), Good (1965), Hanson (2008), Christiano (2018), Ho and Whitfill (2025),
Aghion et al. (2017).

These concepts are often conflated with each other and the term “RSI.” Some have
treated full automation of AI R&D as sufficient for self-sustaining acceleration. For example, I.J. Good in 1965 states: “an ultraintelligent machine could design even better
machines; there would then unquestionably be an intelligence explosion.” But our models make it clear that such an explosion may not follow if there are diminishing returns
(“ideas become harder to find”) or if feedback loops become bottlenecked.
Modeling RSI. We construct a sequence of progressively richer models of RSI. We present the models in diagrams for readability.
Our basic model distinguishes two production functions that combine to form the core
feedback loop: improvements to algorithmic efficiency are produced with human labor
and AI capabilities; in turn, algorithmic efficiency, along with training compute, raises
AI capabilities. A third production function, for economic output, determines how AI
capabilities impact the wider economy. We extend the model to emphasize the possibility of bottlenecks, where the feedback loop may be broken by the necessity of humans,
compute, or data; and for economic feedback loops, where higher output finances further
compute investment and data collection, potentially alleviating bottlenecks. We derive a
condition under which each model features a self-sustaining acceleration.
We also discuss the possibility that there would be an acceleration only in “narrow”
capabilities. The core feedback loop requires a strong connection between algorithmic
efficiency and the capabilities required to find new algorithmic optimizations. This connection could be strong without necessarily accelerating real-world impacts because such
impacts depend on “broad” capabilities less sensitive to algorithmic efficiency. Finally, we
discuss the possibility that AI capabilities may rapidly advance for specific optimization
3

abilities, but not for all types of algorithmic improvements, bottlenecking RSI.
Our key technical contribution is to introduce a simple graphical framework to represent an otherwise complicated system of variables and feedback loops. Nodes of the
graph represent outputs of a production function; the strengths of edges in the graph
represent elasticities of an output with respect to inputs. There is a self-sustaining acceleration under a condition which can be derived simply using these elasticities and the
graph. Details of this framework are outlined in technical boxes.
Existing empirical evidence & requests for data. Our models depend on a set of critical
measurable parameters. We review existing empirical estimates of these parameters.
We also put forward a list of measures that would be useful for AI companies to provide while remaining feasible to share publicly. The biggest unknowns to be informed by
additional data are (i) the growth rate of algorithmic efficiency in labs, (ii) the fraction of
lab R&D expenditures going to each input (humans, data, experimental compute, inference for R&D), and (iii) direct measures of how much models contribute to research, like
the share of technical advances produced by AI.
Plausibility and implications. We make a tentative calibration of the self-sustaining acceleration condition using the existing data that is available, measuring AI capabilities
using the Epoch Capabilities Index (Ho et al., 2025). We find that the condition is met if
a one-unit increase in AI model capabilities results in at least 15% higher AI R&D productivity. A rough back-of-the-envelope calculation based on reported AI engineer uplift
suggests this return has been around 9% since the launch of coding agents. This number is
below the model-implied threshold, suggesting we are not experiencing a self-sustaining
acceleration. Nonetheless, there is ample evidence that this return is not constant and
has been increasing of late. Our model therefore does not rule out the possibility of selfsustaining acceleration in the near future.
Given the vast uncertainty in both the data and model behind our calibration, we also
discuss other qualitative evidence for and against a self-sustaining acceleration. Existing survey and benchmark evidence suggests that AI systems are increasingly useful in
discovering new algorithmic improvements. On the other hand, algorithmic progress has
historically depended on continued compute scaling, and future compute growth may become constrained by power, capital, or broader economic growth. Moreover, even if the
technical conditions identified by our calibration are eventually met, deployment could
be substantially slowed by political and regulatory constraints.
Position in the literature. The economics literature on RSI is founded on Aghion et al.
(2017), who derived conditions under which AI-driven automation could generate accelerating or even explosive economic growth, and Davidson (2023), whose computecentric framework offered an early formal model of AI takeoff dynamics. We complement an emerging literature on the economics of RSI in three ways. First, our networked
models build on Davidson et al. (2026), who formally develop a general theory of semiendogenous growth models with innovation networks plus economic feedback loops and
apply it to AI. Second, we emphasize the distinction between narrow and broad capabil4

ities in both theory and the discussion of economic impact. This distinction is largely set
aside in the review articles of Trammell and Korinek (2025) and Jones (2026). Third, we
provide a wish list of empirical objects that AI companies can both measure and feasibly
share openly that would be informative for the public conversation on RSI. This supplements the existing empirical efforts that we review (e.g., Whitfill and Wu 2025, Gundlach
et al. 2025, Epoch 2026).

2 M ODELS OF R ECURSIVE S ELF -I MPROVEMENT
We present a progression of models to understand the economics of recursive selfimprovement. The models are presented graphically, where each directed edge indicates
that one variable is an input to the production function of the other, and with a strength
that is an elasticity. The condition for self-sustaining acceleration can be read off from
the graph: as we describe below, it is related to the partial elasticities represented by the
strength of the edges. In technical details boxes, for interested readers only, we make
precise how to translate our graphs into equations.

2.1 Basic Model of Algorithmic Progress (Jones, 1995)
We start by applying the Jones (1995)
model of innovation to AI progress.

Figure 1: Jones Model of Innovation

We let A denote algorithmic efficiency, defined as the inverse of the training compute required to reach a given level of capabilities.3

R&D
labor (L)

algorithmic
improvements ( Ȧ)

Improvements to algorithmic efficiency
( Ȧ) are determined by two factors:

▼

algorithmic
efficiency (A)

1. The quantity of R&D labor ( L).
2. The current level of algorithmic efficiency (A). Higher achievements could either make improvements harder (diminishing returns) or easier (increasing returns).
The second effect implies a feedback loop between the stock of technology (A) and new
technological improvements ( A). Its strength is characterized by the elasticity of A to A,
which is denoted ε A,A .
•

•

•

3 One simple operationalization is the training time required to reach the GPT-2 level pretraining loss.
2026
Algorithmic progress has caused this to fall by a factor of 700 over 2019-2026, implying A
A2019 = 700. A fuller
accounting of algorithmic progress would also account for downstream capabilities, and scale-dependence.
We discuss these further below.

5

Self-sustaining acceleration. We say there is self-sustaining acceleration in A if, holding
exogenous inputs fixed, the growth rate of technology ( Ȧ/A) is higher when the level of
technology (A) is higher. In this model, the exogenous input held fixed is R&D labor (L).
In this model, a self-sustaining acceleration occurs when the elasticity ε A,A > 1, meaning
that a 1% increase in the stock of ideas (A) causes an increase in the discovery of new
ideas ( A) of more than 1%, holding labor (L) constant. Empirically, in traditional industries ranging from agriculture to semiconductors, the elasticity is well below 1, implying
stable growth of A requires an ever-increasing quantity of R&D effort (Bloom et al., 2020).
Studies examining historical elasticities of software and AI algorithmic progress also estimate that this condition does not hold without additional feedback loops (Erdil et al.,
2024; Eth and Davidson, 2025), which we discuss next.
•

•

Definition: Elasticity
An elasticity measures responsiveness, in proportional terms: the percentage
change in an output caused by a one-percent change in an input, holding other
inputs fixed. For an output variable Y = f ( X1 , . . . , Xn ), the elasticity of Y with
respect to one of its inputs X j is
ε Y,Xj ≡

∂ log Y
∂ f Xj
=
.
∂ log X j
∂X j Y

Equivalently, it is the local slope of Y against X j on logarithmic axes. For a power
function Y = X a , the elasticity is constant and equal to the exponent a.
Technical Details: Graphs & self-sustaining acceleration in technology
What do graph edges mean? Graph edges (−→) indicate that one variable is an
input to the production function of another. The diagram for the Jones model implies there exists some function Ȧ = f ( A, L).
The strength of a graph edge is determined by the elasticity of a variable with respect to its parents. Denote the two elasticities in the Jones model as:
∂ log f ( A, L)
∂ log f ( A, L)
ε A,A =
and ε A,L =
∂ log A
∂ log L
where ε A,A is the rate of diminishing returns to R&D and ε A,L is the returns to scale
in contemporaneous research effort. The Jones model is often written assuming that
these two elasticities are constant ( A = Lλ A1− β with constant λ and β), but we do
not make that assumption.
•

•

•

•

•

Accumulation. Our directed graphs distinguish stock variables from flow variables to ensure that the diagrams map one-to-one to a system of equations without
ambiguity (Richardson, 1986). We use solid arrows (−→) to represent how variables
relate to each other at each point in time, and use triangles (▶) to denote how the
rate of change of a stock variable, which is a flow (e.g. Ȧ), accumulates into itself

6

(e.g. into A) over time.
Feedback loops and their strength. In the Jones model, there is only one feedback
loop, between technological improvements Ȧ and the level of technology A. Below
we will consider models with many feedback loops, and ones where each feedback
loop may traverse many edges (A −→ B −→ C −→ · · · ). Formally, each feedback
loop is an ordered sequence of directed edges e = (e1 , . . . ei , . . .), whose strength is
governed by the partial elasticities that we denote ε ei .
The strength of any individual feedback loop e is determined by the product of the
elasticities along the edges, Πi ε ei .
The strength of all feedback loops is determined by the total elasticity of Ȧ with
respect to A, which sums over all individual feedback loops:
!
d log Ȧ
E A,A ≡
=
∑ ∏ ε ei
d log A
i
paths e
•

from A to Ȧ

In Jones, with a single edge, the total elasticity is the partial elasticity: E A,A = ε A,A .
•

•

Self-sustaining acceleration in technological growth. If all exogenous inputs are
held constant, the total elasticity determines how the growth rate of technology
g A = Ȧ/A changes as A grows, yielding three regimes:


E A,A < 1: g A falls as A grows ⇒ sub-exponential growth (fizzling out),
E A,A = 1: g A constant
⇒ exponential growth (knife-edge),

E
g A rises as A grows ⇒ self-sustaining acceleration.
A,A > 1:
•

•

•

That is, A shows self-sustaining acceleration when

E A,A =
•

d log Ȧ
> 1.
d log A

(1)

In the Jones model, since there is a single feedback path A → Ȧ with a single edge,
growth shows self-sustaining acceleration when ε A,A > 1.
•

Non-constant elasticities and growth spurts. Self-sustaining acceleration at one
point in time does not imply self-sustaining acceleration forever, because the elasticities are not necessarily constant. In the bottlenecks section below we discuss this
likely case. Even locally self-sustaining acceleration would be notable.

7

2.2 Baseline Model of RSI
Our baseline model of RSI adds a few elements.

Figure 2: Baseline model of RSI
R&D
labor (L)

1. We introduce AI capabilities (C),
which are determined by algorithmic
efficiency (A) as well as training compute (T). Compute is held fixed,
for now. Measuring AI capabilities
is notoriously difficult, but two common metrics are METR’s time horizon measure (Kwa et al. (2025)) and
the Epoch Capabilities Index (ECI, Ho
et al. (2025)), though both metrics
have flaws.

algorithmic
improvements ( Ȧ)
▼

algorithmic
efficiency (A)

training
compute (T)

capabilities
(C)

•

2. Algorithms are improved ( A) not just
by human R&D labor (L) but also with
AI capabilities.
Critically, the fact that AI capabilities now feed into algorithmic improvements creates a
new feedback loop: the core feedback loop (A → C → A). This loop is in addition to a
self-feedback loop (A → A) that appeared in the Jones model.
•

•

The strength of a multi-step feedback loop like the core loop is determined by the strength
of all edges along it. In particular, the strength is the product of all elasticities along the
loop, ε A,C ε C,A .
•

Self-sustaining acceleration. Self-sustaining acceleration in algorithmic efficiency now
depends on the combined strength of these two feedback loops. The condition is that the
total elasticity of Ȧ with respect to A, denoted E A,A , exceeds one:
•

E A,A =
•

+

•

ε A,A
|{z}

self-feedback loop

•

ε ε
| A,C{zC,A}

> 1

(2)

core feedback loop

Self-sustaining acceleration in AI capabilities. It is possible for algorithmic efficiency
(A) to accelerate while capabilities (C) do not, if the elasticity from A to C is falling, for
example if there was a hard ceiling on model capabilities. We discuss the issue further in
Section 2.4.

8

2.3 Bottlenecks: Human, Compute, or Data
The elasticities in our baseline model may
fall over time: the feedback loops could
become bottlenecked by critical inputs.
Whether or not one input may bottleneck
an output depends on how complementary
different inputs are.

Figure 3: Model with bottlenecks
human R&D
labor (L)
experimental
compute (E)

To emphasize the possibility of bottlenecks, we modify the baseline model to allow for three more inputs in the system.
Experimental compute (E) and inference
compute (K) are both used to make algorithmic improvements. Data (D), meanwhile, is used to produce AI capabilities.

algorithmic
improvements ( Ȧ)

inference
compute (K)

▼

algorithmic
efficiency (A)

training
compute (T)

capabilities
(C)

Because the two feedback loops remain the
data (D)
same (A → Ȧ and A → C → Ȧ), the total
elasticity remains the same as above, and
thus the self-sustaining condition also remains the same as (2). However these additional
terms give us additional reasons why the core elasticity, ε A,C , may fall: the arrow from
•

C → Ȧ may weaken. We discuss these bottlenecks in turn:
• Labor. Algorithmic improvements could become bottlenecked by a shortage of human labor if AI agents can only help with some but not all parts of the research process (e.g. due to “lack of taste”). If inference compute increases disproportionately
relative to human labor, bottlenecks reduce the marginal value of such compute in
research (Jones, 2025).
• Experimental compute. AI labs often allocate a large part of their compute to experimentation. If model capabilities and experimental compute are strong complements, then this could be a bottleneck (Whitfill and Wu, 2025; Ho and Whitfill, 2025).
• Inference compute. There is clearly a strong interaction between model capabilities
and inference compute in producing algorithmic improvements. If they are strong
complements then slow growth in inference compute could serve as a bottleneck,
diminishing the effect of capabilities on algorithmic improvements.
• Data. A lack of high-quality data could bottleneck the advance of capabilities (Farboodi et al., 2025; Erdil et al., 2025; Millidge, 2025). On the other hand, Ho et al.
(2024) argue that most algorithmic progress is “data-augmenting”, implying that
data will not become a bottleneck.
• Training compute. A shortage of compute for training could also bottleneck the
advance of AI capabilities (Gundlach et al., 2025).

9

Technical Details: The C −→ Ȧ arrow
Aside on AI capabilities → algorithmic improvements Note that human researchers (L), AI capabilities (C) and experimental compute, E, combine to produce
algorithmic progress. Previous literature, such as Eth and Davidson (2025) and
Whitfill and Wu (2025), has tried to parametrize this function. But our view is that
it is not obvious what this function looks like because it depends on “the returns to
intelligence” and how humans and AI systems differ, both of which we have a poor
understanding of. Luckily the only thing we need to know is the elasticity noted
above and it may be possible to measure this elasticity without fully understanding
AI capabilities. We discuss this further in the data section.

2.4 Narrow and Broad Capabilities
Our baseline model treats AI capabilities
as a scalar C, which could be interpreted Figure 4: Narrow capabilities feed back;
as the capability to both (1) contribute to broad capabilities dangle.
algorithmic improvements ( A) and (2) conR&D
tribute to producing economic output (Y).
labor (L)
However, the core feedback loop only requires the C → Ȧ arrow, not any arrow
algorithmic
from C → Y.
improvements ( Ȧ)
•

▼

algorithmic
efficiency (A)

Here, we make explicit the possibility of a
narrow acceleration, where algorithmic efficiency accelerates but economic output
does not. (For simplicity, this subsection
suppresses training compute T.) The figure illustrates the model: we distinguish
between a ‘narrow’ capability (C1 ) that is
useful for contributing to algorithmic improvements, and a ‘broad’ capability (C2 )
that affects economic output (Y).

narrow
capabilities
(C1 )

broad
capabilities
(C2 )
economic
output (Y)

The clean cut we draw between capabilities useful for algorithmic improvements and all
other capabilities is a strong simplification. In reality, it is plausible that a “narrow” acceleration occurs across easier-to-verify tasks which includes optimizing algorithms but
also many parts of mathematics, coding writ large, and more. Such progress would have
impacts on the real economy but would be exceptionally jagged. It is also of course possible for progress in narrow tasks to eventually spill over into harder-to-verify tasks that
matter for the broader economy.

10

Self-sustaining acceleration. The condition for a self-sustaining acceleration in algorithmic efficiency remains as before, but with narrow capabilities C1 substituted for C:

E A,A =
•

+

•

ε A,A
|{z}

self-feedback loop

•

ε A,C1 ε C1 ,A
| {z }

narrow capability loop

Broad capabilities C2 do not appear in this expression.
Such an acceleration in algorithmic efficiency A need not imply a self-sustaining acceleration in broad capabilities C2 , and therefore need not imply such an acceleration in
economic growth (Y). The condition for broad capabilities depends additionally on a superelasticity: how the passthrough from algorithmic efficiency A into broad capabilities C2
changes as A rises:4
d log ε C2 ,A
>1
(3)
ε A,A + ε A,C1 ε C1 ,A +
d log A
| {z }
•

•

superelasticity

Intuitively, the elasticity ε C2 ,A could fall – the superelasticity could be negative – if traditional scaling was sufficient to surpass human abilities at algorithmic optimization (C1 ),
but not to surpass human abilities in other practical areas (C2 ) due to unmodeled data
bottlenecks on the latter.5
4 A corresponding condition for acceleration in output depends on an additional superelasticity from C
2

to Y; but for practical purposes we could define broad capabilities by their economic value, so Y ∝ C2 .
5 This seems plausible because computers already outperform humans at many well-defined optimization tasks.

11

2.5 Specific Optimization Ability and Growth Spurts
It seems very likely that AI will be relatively better at contributing to some parts
of model training than others. This in turn
is likely to cause “growth spurts” in AI
progress.

Figure 5: AI helps one subalgorithm

The model at right assumes overall efficiency (A) depends on the efficiency of
two sub-algorithms (A1 and A2 ), but AI directly helps improve only the second one,
C → A2 . To isolate this AI-assisted channel, hold A1 fixed. The relevant feedback
loop is then A2 → A → C → A2 . Because
g A = ε A,A2 g A2 , self-sustaining acceleration
in overall efficiency requires:
d log ε A,A2
> 1.
ε A2 ,A2 + ε A2 ,C ε C,A ε A,A2 +
d log A2
|
{z
}
| {z }
d log Ȧ /d log A
•

human R&D
labor (L1 )

human R&D
labor (L2 )

improvements
to algorithm 1
( Ȧ1 )

improvements
to algorithm 2
( Ȧ2 )

algorithm 1
efficiency
(A1 )

algorithm 2
efficiency
(A2 )

▼

▼

•

•

overall
efficiency
(A)

•

2

2

changing passthrough
into overall efficiency

capabilities
(C)

If these elasticities were constant then the
second term would be zero, and selfsustaining acceleration today would imply self-sustaining acceleration forever. However
there are two reasons why the condition may cease to hold, producing only a temporary
“growth spurt”:
1. Parallel algorithms. Overall algorithmic efficiency could be bottlenecked by type-1
algorithmic efficiency, which is not improved by AI capabilities. As type-2 algorithms become abundant, the arrow from A2 → A weakens: ε A,A2 falls and its log
derivative is negative. For example, if the compute costs of two necessary processes
add, so that 1/A = 1/A1 + 1/A2 , then as A2 /A1 → ∞,
d log ε A,A2
→ −1.
ε A,A2 → 0
and
d log A2
Thus a spurt driven by progress on the easy component stalls unless AI also starts
accelerating progress on the bottleneck component.
2. Low ceilings. If one of the algorithms is already close to a natural ceiling then
its elasticity must necessarily fall. Some algorithms are naturally limited, e.g. if
kernel efficiency is currently 50%, it can only increase by a factor of two; while
the efficiency of other algorithms has improved by orders of magnitude, and may
continue to improve by large factors.
Empirically, it will be useful to document which types of algorithms are receiving the
12

biggest boost from AI-assisted research. On first principles, we might expect bigger
boosts where there are low costs of verification (e.g., optimizing inference, optimizing
elicitation) than where there are high costs of verification (optimizing architectures). Additionally, it is plausible that improvements to type-1 algorithms do advance capabilities,
but only ‘narrowly’ in the spirit of the model in Section 2.4. We leave combining the two
models for future work.

2.6 Economic Feedback Loops
The previous models held constant the
level of compute (for training, inference, or Figure 6: Model with Economic Feedback
experiments) and held constant the quan- Loops
tity of data. This isolated the role of feedhuman R&D
back loops driven by algorithmic improvelabor (L)
experimental
ments.
Ė ▶
compute (E)

There are also economic feedback loops
(Davidson et al., 2026):

inference
K̇ ▶ compute (K)

1. Increased AI capabilities (C ) drive
higher economic output (Y ).

algorithmic
improvements ( Ȧ)
▼

algorithmic
efficiency (A)
training
Ṫ ▶ compute (T)

2. Higher economic output in turn finances further investment in compute (for experiments E, for inference
K, and for training T), which feeds
back into AI capabilities.

capabilities
(C)
Ḋ ▶ data (D)
economic
output (Y)

AI-induced economic growth also generates more data, likewise increasing AI capabilities, and further increasing economic
growth (Farboodi et al., 2025).
We emphasize that economic output (Y) – and the model as a whole – can be interpreted
macroeconomically, where Y is GDP, or microeconomically, where Y is the revenue of a
single AI firm. In the latter case, as AI capabilities progress and the firm grows, more chips
or data are affordable (without substantially altering factor prices). Such microeconomic
effects are self-evidently already occurring, and the resulting loops may drive capability
acceleration even without substantial macroeconomic impacts.
Feedback loops and self-sustaining acceleration. Aside from the two feedback loops
discussed above (A → A and A → C → A), self-sustaining acceleration in algorithmic efficiency now depends on the strength of additional economic feedback loops that
run through AI capabilities. For instance, capabilities might drive the accumulation of
•

•

13

•

high-quality data, which in turn drives capabilities (C → Y → D → D → C), or the accumulation of training compute, which in turn drives capabilities (C → Y → T → T → C).
•

The condition for a self-sustaining acceleration is now substantially more complicated
and requires taking into account these more complicated feedback loops. The technical
details box below states the condition; Davidson et al. (2026) offers a general framework
and solution.
Technical Details: Self-sustaining acceleration with economic feedback loops
The prior boxes on technical details apply only when there is a single accumulating
state: before, this was merely A. Now, instead, there is an entire state vector:
X ≡ ( A, T, D, E, K )′
d log Ẋ

Define the reduced-form elasticity matrix M, with Mij ≡ d log Xi . Each entry of
j
M measures how strongly one accumulable input increases the accumulation of
another, after tracing through the contemporaneous graph.
Davidson et al. (2026) show that there is self-sustaining acceleration in algorithmic
efficiency when ρ( M ) > 1, where ρ( M ) is the dominant eigenvalue of the feedback
matrix M.
After some math, it can be shown that the eigenvalue condition holds when the
sum of three feedback channels exceeds one: the core feedback loop (A → C → A);
the indirect loop between economic output and capabilities through training compute and data; and the direct economic loop through experimental and inference
compute for algorithmic improvements. In math:
ε Ȧ,C ε C,A
1−ε
| {zȦ,A}
•

core feedback loop

+ ε Y,C (ε C,T + ε C,D )
|
{z
}

indirect economic loops

ε C,A ε Y,C
(ε Ȧ,E + ε Ȧ,K )
1 − ε Ȧ,A
|
{z
}

+

> 1.

(4)

direct economic loops through
experimental and inference compute

Note that this condition assumes that the direct algorithmic efficiency self-loop does
not on its own power a self-sustaining acceleration (ε A,A < 1).a It also imposes the
Solow-like assumption that capital-like variables accumulate one-for-one with output: ε T,Y = ε D,Y = ε E,Y = ε K,Y = 1. If there are no economic impacts of AI capabilities (ε Y,C = 0), the condition collapses to the earlier condition without economic
feedback loops.
•

•

•

•

•

14

A subtlety is that the second loop does not run through algorithmic efficiency A and
is self-contained: higher capabilities produce more output, financing more training
compute and raising capabilities (C → Y → T → T → C), or producing more
data and raising capabilities (C → Y → D → D → C). In either of these loops, the
economy achieves a self-sustaining acceleration in algorithmic efficiency A ‘merely’
by raising GDP, which produces more compute or data (Davidson et al., 2026).
•

•

An additional takeaway is that the condition with economic feedback loops, (4),
requires estimating five new elasticities: the elasticity of economic output to AI capabilities ε Y,C ; the elasticity of capabilities to training compute ε C,T ; the elasticity of
capabilities to data ε C,D ; the elasticity of algorithmic improvements to experimental
compute ε A,E ; and the elasticity of algorithmic improvements to inference compute
ε A,K .
•

•

a Analogously, the rearrangement into this three-term form assumes the indirect economic loop

is not self-sustaining on its own, ε Y,C (ε C,T + ε C,D ) < 1; if it were, acceleration would occur through
that loop alone.

3 D ATA R ELEVANT TO RSI
We primarily focus this section on calibrating the basic bottlenecks model. This is motivated primarily by simplicity and because larger economic feedback loops will be slower.
To get empirical traction, we modify the bottlenecks model by assuming the existence
of an “R&D effort aggregator (R)” which combines human researchers (L), automated
AI researchers (running on inference compute, K), and experimental compute (E) into a
single scalar. R&D effort is then the sole input to algorithmic improvements ( A). This
essentially assumes that all R&D inputs interact with the existing stock of algorithmic
progress in the same way. This will let us use historical data on human inputs to calibrate
what will happen with AI inputs.
Once we make this assumption, we can expand and re-arrange the condition for selfsustaining acceleration in algorithmic efficiency, (2):6
•

ε A,R
•

1−ε
| {zA,A}
•

return to R&D

·

ε R,C
|{z}

·

ε C,A
|{z}

> 1

(5)

research effort’s capabilities’
elasticity to
elasticity to
AI capabilities algorithmic
efficiency

6 The condition (2) delineates a self-sustaining acceleration in algorithmic efficiency. In this section, we

are most interested in a self-sustaining acceleration in AI capabilities. The condition for capabilities is the
d log ε C,A
same as the condition for efficiency, augmented with a fourth, ‘superelasticity’ term, 1−ε1
d log A . This
•

A,A

measures the change in the capabilities elasticity ε C,A as algorithmic efficiency A grows. If ε C,A is constant,
the superelasticity term is zero and the condition reduces to the three terms shown here. In Section 3.4,
which we put in a technical box, we argue the evidence indeed points to a superelasticity near zero.

15

Technical details: rearranging the self-sustaining acceleration condition
The condition for a self-sustaining acceleration in algorithmic efficiency, under the
assumption of an R&D effort aggregator R, is
ε A,A + ε A,R ε R,C ε C,A > 1.
•

•

This is the same as the core feedback loop condition used in the bottlenecks section,
(2), except that now AI capabilities C pass through the R aggregator to affect A.
•

Subtracting the direct-spillover term and dividing both sides by 1 − ε A,A isolates
the capability loop:
ε A,R ε R,C ε C,A
> 1.
1 − ε A,A
•

•

•

Note that the denominator is positive whenever the direct spillover alone is not
already self-sustaining, ε A,A < 1. Then, grouping the first factor of the first term
gives the form above,
•

ε A,R
•

1−ε
| {zA,A}
•

return to R&D

·

ε R,C
|{z}

·

ε C,A
|{z}

> 1.

research effort’s capabilities’
elasticity to
elasticity to
AI capabilities algorithmic
efficiency

In our view, estimating this quantity, tracking it over time, and extrapolating when
it might cross 1 is arguably the most important empirical exercise for assessing whether
a self-sustaining acceleration will occur. The rest of this section maps each term in the
condition to the data needed to estimate it: Section 3.1 covers the return to research, Section 3.2 covers the elasticity of research effort with respect to AI capabilities, and Section 3.3 covers the response of capabilities to algorithmic progress. We then collect detailed supplementary evidence on model-training inputs and model economics to build a
broader picture of AI R&D automation.

3.1 Return to Research
It turns out – derived in the technical details box below – that the first term, the “returns
to research”, can be measured from two growth rates: the growth rate of algorithmic
efficiency (g A ≡ Ȧ/A) and the growth rate of R&D effort (gR ≡ Ṙ/R). On a balanced
growth path:
ε A,R
g
= A
1−ε
gR
| {zA,A}
•

•

return to R&D

We therefore need to estimate the growth rate of algorithmic efficiency, g A , and the growth
rate of research effort, gR :
16

1. We can measure growth in algorithmic efficiency g A directly from model-training
data.
2. We derive in a technical box below that one can measure R&D effort as the spendweighted average of growth rates in inputs: human researchers L, experimental compute E, and inference compute used for research K. Using S to denote spend shares,
gR = ∑ Sinput ginput
input

Alternatively, we can measure gR directly from spending. Total R&D spend is the
sum across inputs of price times quantity, and log-differentiating shows its growth
splits into a price component and a quantity component:
gspend =

∑ Sinput gprice of input + ∑ Sinput ginput
input

input

|

{z

}

≡ gprices , input price inflation

|

{z

}

= gR , by the result above

so gR = gspend − gprices : growth in total R&D spend, deflated by an index of R&D
input prices.
Model primitive

Existing data

Data ask

Growth in
algorithmic
efficiency (g A )

Ho et al. (2024) estimate pretraining
algorithmic progress of 3x a year (i.e.
compute needed to achieve a given
level of capability is 1/3 as much
each year). Whitfill et al. (2025)
estimate 3.5x/year for the entire
stack. Ho (2026) estimates 10x/year
for the entire stack.

Current data weakness:
Compute estimates for
models since 2024 are
uncertain.

Gundlach et al. (2025) argue that
algorithmic progress has grown at
different rates across scales:
1.5x/year at small scale, and
2.5x/year at frontier scale, for
pretraining.

17

Ideal new data: model
training compute after 2024 to
estimate g A .

Model primitive

Existing data

Data ask

Share of human
Epoch AI (2026) estimates growth
researchers (L) of rates of around 2–3x/year in total
R&D spend, and staff for frontier labs over 2023–2025.
its growth g L
Whitfill and Wu (2025) estimate
Its share S L and
headcount growth rates of
growth g L enter
2–3X/year for Anthropic and
gR =
OpenAI over 2022–2024.
∑input Sinput ginput .
Cottier et al. (2024) estimates that
around 1/3 of the cost of training
models was spent on researcher
salaries.

Current data weakness:
Employee headcount does not
necessarily map to the
researcher headcount.

You (2025) estimates that in 2024
only 10% of OpenAI’s R&D compute
was on final training runs, while 90%
was on experimental compute (i.e.
training which did not directly affect
weights used in a public product).

Current data weakness:
Experimental compute share
in total compute is not the
same as the experimental
compute share of total R&D
spending. The composition of
experimental compute is also
not clear.

Share of
experimental
compute (E) of
R&D spend, and
its growth gE

Its share SE and
growth gE enter
Denain and Wu (2026) estimate
gR =
similar ratios for Chinese companies.
∑input Sinput ginput .
Morrison et al. (2026) estimate
similar ratios for OLMo 3 family.
You et al. (2026) finds that the total
growth rate of chips is about 3.3x a
year (doubling every 7 months).

Share of
inference
compute (K) of
R&D spend, and
its growth gK

No data available.

Ideal new data: Granular lab
data on staff, split by seniority
and by researchers vs.
engineers, would let us treat
these as separate inputs
rather than an aggregate L.

Ideal new data: Labs could
publish detailed data on
experimental compute spend
across domains and over
time, which would help
estimate how much
experimental compute
bottlenecks automated
research.
Ideal new data: Labs could
publish detailed data on
inference compute spend
across domains and over
time.

Its share SK and
growth gK enter
gR =
∑input Sinput ginput .
18

Model primitive

Existing data

Data ask

Total R&D
spend in dollars,
and its growth

Denain and Wu (2026) estimate R&D
compute spending for several labs
from public filings.

Current data weakness: No
spending over time yet. Even
given spend, no off-the-shelf
deflator fits AI R&D, since
compute prices fall rapidly
while wages do not.

Deflated by an
index of input
prices, this is an
alternative way
to measure gR .

Substitutability
of labor and
experimental
compute
How
substitutable
labor and
compute are
controls how fast
ε R,C falls as
research becomes
bottlenecked by
experimental
compute.

Ideal new data: Labs could
publish total annual R&D
expenditure alongside a
self-constructed deflator.
Whitfill and Wu (2025) try to
estimate the substitutability between
labor and experimental compute in
AI R&D, using variation in relative
prices, but their findings are
inconclusive.

Current data weakness:
Aside from data quality, it is
unclear whether the need for
experimental compute
increases with higher training
compute.
Ideal new data: labs could
conduct experiments that
would give teams
randomized amounts of R&D
labor and experimental
compute, but this is
expensive.
One cheaper substitute is
using AI labor in place of
human labor in the
experiment.
Cheaper still is to survey
managers how much more
progress they would make
with (A) twice the researchers
(compute fixed); (B) twice the
compute (researchers fixed);
(C) both doubled.

19

Technical details: cost minimization and elasticities
Throughout this section we use the correspondence that, under cost-minimizing
input choice, the elasticity of an output with respect to an input equals that input’s
share of expenditure.
Setup. Let output R = R( X1 , . . . , Xn ) be produced from inputs Xi with prices pi .
A firm minimizing the cost ∑i pi Xi of attaining a target R̄ has first-order conditions
pi = µ ∂R/∂Xi for a common multiplier µ. The cost share of input i is then
Si ≡

p i Xi
(∂R/∂Xi ) Xi
=
.
∑j pj Xj
∑ j (∂R/∂X j ) X j

Constant returns to scale. We take R to have constant returns to scale. This is
without loss of generality: R is a latent index, and its returns to scale are absorbed
by the elasticity ε A,R in the return-to-research term. Under constant returns, Euler’s
theorem gives ∑ j (∂R/∂X j ) X j = R, so
•

Si =

∂R Xi
= ε R,Xi .
∂Xi R

Cost shares equal elasticities.
When firms do not optimize. If input choices are not fully cost-minimizing, the
equality becomes a revealed-preference bound: observed cost shares reflect the
firm’s own belief about marginal products, so they remain informative about the
elasticities.
Technical details: return to research
The return to research as g A /gR . Write the discovery rate as Ȧ = f ( R, A), so
g A ≡ Ȧ/A = f ( R, A)/A. Log-differentiating with respect to time,

d log g A
= ε Ȧ,R gR − 1 − ε Ȧ,A g A .
dt
On a balanced growth path g A is constant, so the left-hand side is zero and
ε Ȧ,R
gA
=
,
gR
1 − ε Ȧ,A
which is exactly the return-to-research term. This holds exactly on a balanced
growth path and approximately when g A is approximately constant. The smooth,
steady historical rate of algorithmic progress makes this a reasonable benchmark,
though not one we expect to hold if RSI pushes us off the balanced-growth path.

20

Decomposing gR . The growth rate of research effort follows the growth-rate chain
rule across its inputs,
gR = ∑ ε R,i gi .
input i

Using the cost-share correspondence above, ε R,i = Si , so
gR =

∑ Si gi ,

input i

a spend-weighted average of input growth rates over human labor L, experimental
compute E, and inference compute K.

3.2 Research Effort to Capabilities
The second term measures how strongly effective research effort responds to more capable AIs. This is the hardest of the three to measure, since it captures how AI capabilities
translate into real-world research effort. This requires scientifically understanding AI capabilities and how they feed into research. The science of AI capabilities is in its infancy.
One possible route is to measure it directly, through studies of how much AI accelerates end-to-end research.
A second route uses a cost-share argument. If we model “effective AI labor” as a
Cobb–Douglas function of AI capabilities and the quantity of AI researchers (inference
compute), e.g. C γ K, then this term equals γSK , where γ is the returns to capabilities relative to scaling the quantity of AI labor and SK is the inference-compute cost share (derived
in the technical details below).
Model primitive

Existing data

Data ask

Share of AI R&D inference
compute (K) of total R&D
spend (SK )

As aforementioned in the
last subsection, we have
almost no data on lab
expenditure on inference
or its share relative to
other R&D inputs.

Ideal new data: Labs
could publish detailed
data on inference
compute spend across
domains and over time.

The inference spend share SK ,
one of the two components of
ε R,C = γSK .

21

Model primitive

Existing data

Data ask

Tradeoff between training
and inference compute (γ)

The parameter γ governs
the returns to scaling
capabilities C versus
scaling inference compute
K, since we model
effective AI labor as C γ K.
Estimates from Villalobos
and Atkinson (2023) imply
γ ≈ 0.15–0.3 under the
ECI normalization of
capabilities (C = eECI ).7

Current data weakness:
The estimation is not up
to date, and the implied γ
divides estimates from
two separate studies with
different tasks and model
generations.

We have self-reported
productivity gains from
surveys: 1.4–2X in METR’s
survey of technical
workers (Becker, 2026),
and roughly 4X in the
Claude Mythos Preview
system card (Anthropic,
2026). The magnitudes are
hard to interpret, but the
upward trend is clear.

Current data weakness:
Note that this is the
productivity effect of AI,
but ε R,C is the total
research effort added due
to one extra unit of
capability.

The quality–quantity exponent
γ, the other component of
ε R,C = γSK .

The effect of AI use on
researcher productivity
A direct (if loose) measure of
ε R,C : how much capability
raises effective R&D.

Favaro and Clark (2026)
report lines of code
merged per engineer per
day rose roughly 8X
between 2024 and Q2 2026.

22

Ideal new data: More
extensive study on public
benchmarks/with ECI.

Ideal new data: An RCT
that measures
productivity benefits
from extra capabilities.

Model primitive

Existing data

Data ask

The strength of autonomous
R&D

AI agents have recently
advanced the frontier in
some optimization
problems; however, it is
difficult to find a metric to
measure their overall
ability.8

Current data weakness:
Benchmark questions are
not the same as real-life
LLM training problems.

A direct measure of ε R,C (and
the discovery-rate response
ε Ȧ,C ): AI’s standalone
contribution to discovery.

Recent system cards report
mixed results on
benchmarks of AI R&D.
Models generally
outperform humans on
optimization problems
when the humans are
given between 8 and 40
hours, but show low pass
rates on complex
debugging problems
(Claude Mythos Preview
system card, Anthropic,
2026, Table 2.3.3.A;
GPT-5.5 system card,
section 9.1.3). These
results are difficult to
place on a common scale.

23

Ideal new data: How
autonomous AI systems
perform on real LLM
training problems would
be especially informative.
The ideal data would
characterize the returns to
expenditure on agentic,
human, and hybrid labor.

Model primitive

Existing data

Data ask

Capabilities of AI R&D

Si et al. (2025) find that
AI-generated AI research
ideas are rated highly
relative to
human-generated ones.
Trehan and Chopra (2026)
find a range of
weaknesses, including
both taste and execution.

Current data weakness:
It remains unclear how to
describe AI’s weaknesses
in AI R&D relative to
human researchers. A
common split is between
idea generation (taste)
and idea execution.

A direct, qualitative read on
ε R,C — which parts of research
AI substitutes for, and where it
remains weak.

The Claude Mythos
Preview system card has
an extended discussion of
the model’s qualitative
strengths and weaknesses
in AI R&D (Anthropic,
2026).

Ideal new data:
Unstructured interviews
with lab staff with
well-designed questions
eliciting AI R&D
weaknesses.

Technical details: research effort to capabilities
Suppose AI enters research effort through a capability-adjusted count of effective
researchers, N = K C γ , where K is the quantity of inference compute and C γ is a
quality adjustment, so that R = R(. . . , N, . . . ). By the chain rule,
ε R,C =

∂ log R
∂ log R ∂ log N
=
= ε R,N · γ,
∂ log C
∂ log N ∂ log C

since ∂ log N/∂ log C = γ. Effective researchers are purchased through inference
compute, so the expenditure on this input is the inference-compute spend and its
cost share is SK . Applying the cost-share correspondence (see the technical details
on cost minimization above), ε R,N = SK , giving
ε R,C = γ SK .

3.3 Capabilities Response to Algorithmic Efficiency
The third term is the elasticity of capabilities with respect to algorithmic progress. Suppose that algorithmic efficiency and training compute enter C symmetrically (both through
effective compute, C = C ( A × T )). This implies that the elasticity of capabilities to algorithmic progress equals the elasticity of capability to training compute i.e. ε C,A = ε C,T .
Note that ε C,T is precisely the object estimated by scaling-law studies. Epoch’s work on
the capabilities–compute relationship (Ho et al., 2025; Epoch AI, 2025) estimates values
24

of ε C,T around 6.5 when C is defined as the exponential of the Epoch Capabilities Index,
eECI .9
One qualification is needed: the symmetry ε C,A = ε C,T relies on algorithmic progress
being scale-free, so that it enters capability only through the product A × T. Gundlach
et al. (2025) present evidence that algorithmic progress is instead scale-biased (faster at
frontier scale than at small scale for pretraining), in which case ε C,A and ε C,T can diverge
and scaling-law estimates identify only the latter. Nonetheless, we treat this term as the
best-measured of the four; the supporting model-training data is collected in the supplementary material (Section 3.5).
Model primitive

Existing data

Data ask

Capabilities’
elasticity to
algorithmic
progress (ε C,A )

Ho et al. (2025) and Epoch AI (2025)
estimate the capability–compute
relationship, implying ε C,A ≈ 6.5
when C = eECI .

Current data weakness:
Estimates assume scale-free
algorithmic progress;
Gundlach et al. (2025) suggest
it is scale-biased.
Ideal new data: Algorithmic
efficiency estimates at
multiple scales, to separate
ε C,A from ε C,T .

Technical details: Measuring the superelasticity term

3.4 The Superelasticity Term
As described in footnote 6, the condition for a self-sustaining acceleration in capabilities (5) technically has a fourth term. The fourth term asks whether the capabilities elasticity ε C,A itself changes as algorithmic efficiency grows, i.e. whether
d log ε C,A /d log A ̸= 0. Our best guess is that it is close to zero. As we showed in the
previous subsection, ε C,A = ε C,T under certain conditions. Thus the superelasticity
measures the proportional change in ε C,T as effective compute grows, which depends on the curvature of the capability–compute relationship rather than its slope.
That relationship has looked close to log-linear across many orders of magnitude of
training compute (Ho et al., 2025; Epoch AI, 2025), so ε C,T appears approximately
constant and therefore the superelasticity near zero.
The caveat is the same scale-free assumption as in the previous subsection: if algorithmic progress is scale-biased (Gundlach et al., 2025), the symmetry breaks, and
constancy of ε C,T need not imply constancy of ε C,A .
9 The magnitude depends on this normalization of capabilities; the loop gain ε
R,C ε C,A that enters the
condition is invariant to it.

25

Model
primitive
Superelasticity
of capabilities
d log ε
( d log C,A
A )

Existing data

Data ask

No direct estimates, but the
capability–compute relationship
appears close to log-linear across
many orders of magnitude of
compute (Ho et al., 2025; Epoch
AI, 2025), which suggests ε C,T ,
and by symmetry ε C,A , is
approximately constant.

Current data weakness:
Scale-biased algorithmic
progress would break the
symmetry with ε C,T .
Ideal new data:
Capability–compute
estimates spanning a wide
range of effective compute,
updated past 2024, to
estimate curvature and not
just slope.

3.5 Supplementary Data
The data below do not measure the three terms in (5) directly but fill out the broader
picture of AI R&D automation, including economic feedback loops. For example, the
model-training laws row helps pin down the third term, the capability–compute scaling
relationship (Section 3.3). The same data also help identify historical growth in algorithmic efficiency and predict the effects of future growth in training compute and data. The
final row covers the economic feedback loop, through which capability funds further inputs.
Model primitive

Existing data

Data ask

Model training laws

The basic model remains
Chinchilla (Hoffmann
et al., 2022), which maps
data and compute to
pretraining loss.

Current data weakness:
Scaling laws for RL
remain largely
unpublished.

Calibrates the capability map
C ( AT ); pins down ε C,A = ε C,T .

Ideal new data:
post-training compute
usage of models.
Growth in training compute
gT ; since effective compute is
AT, it drives capability
growth.

Training compute has
grown 4–5X per year since
2010 (Rahman and Owen,
2024). Whitfill et al. (2025)
discusses possible GDP
constraints on continued
compute scaling.

26

Current data weakness:
There is scarce data on
model training compute
since 2024.
Ideal new data: training
compute of new models.

Model primitive

Existing data

Data ask

Growth in data

There are minimal existing
estimates of data spend by
labs.10

Ideal new data: Labs
could publish data spend,
or partial estimates could
be constructed from
third-party data
providers such as Surge
AI or Scale AI.

We can use firm revenue
estimates, but these are
likely to represent only a
small share of the value
created. Brynjolfsson et al.
(2026) use online choice
experiments to elicit
willingness-to-accept for
giving up generative AI
chatbots, estimating that
consumer surplus
substantially exceeds
firms’ revenues.

Current data weakness:
More estimation needed,
with time variation.

Little direct evidence: AI’s
measured contribution to
GDP remains small
relative to its measured
capabilities. Yotzov et al.
(2026) survey over 5000
executives: 9/10 report no
impact of AI on their
firm’s productivity or
employment over the past
three years, but on
average they expect AI to
raise firm productivity by
1.4% and output by 0.8%
over the next three years.

Current data weakness:
Adoption and usage data
are not tightly linked to
impact on output.

Data D, an input to capability
beyond effective compute AT.

Share of AI’s economic value
creation captured by AI labs
Economic output Y, the
channel through which
capability funds further inputs
(the economic feedback loop).

Elasticity of GDP to
capabilities (ε Y,C )
How much a given capability
improvement raises aggregate
output.

27

Ideal new data: AI firms’
revenue over time.

Ideal new data:
Task-level adoption and
usage data linked to firm
or sector output, tracking
how output effects grow
as capabilities improve.

Model primitive

Existing data

Data ask

Elasticity of AI firm budget to
capabilities (ε Y,C )
We might instead interpret Y
as the budget AI firms have to
spend on data, compute, and
researchers. Then, ε Y,C is how
much additional budget a
given capability improvement
generates (via fundraising or
revenues).

Frontier-lab revenues have
grown around 3x/year
(Epoch AI, 2026) with
notable outliers, e.g.
Anthropic. But lab
expenditure is largely
financed by external
investment rather than
revenue so the loop runs
through expectations.

Current data weakness:
Revenue is observed but
at low frequency. Lab
budgets are largely
financed by investor
expectations rather than
current revenue.
Ideal new data: Credible
estimates for how lab
financing costs (through
equity or debt) respond to
changes in capabilities
progress.

4 D ISCUSSION
To assess the plausibility of self-sustaining acceleration, we provide a very rough calibration of our analytical condition with the available estimates from Section 3. Certain
parameters are unknown, especially the elasticity of R&D to AI capabilities. Thus, we
derive a condition on the range of values for this elasticity that implies self-sustaining
acceleration. We have a high degree of uncertainty in many of these empirical estimates,
and also acknowledge the possibility of model misspecification. Thus we additionally
provide a general discussion of the most important points of evidence for and against
self-sustaining acceleration.

4.1 Model calibration
We now use the estimates we have from Section 3 to calibrate the self-sustaining acceleration condition (5):
ε A,R
•

1−ε
| {zA,A}
•

return to R&D

·

ε R,C
|{z}

·

ε C,A
|{z}

> 1.

research effort’s capabilities’
elasticity to
elasticity to
AI capabilities algorithmic
efficiency

We plug in the following values:
ε

g

ln(3)

A
• 1−Ȧ,R
ε Ȧ,A = gR ≈ ln(3) = 1. We take g A = ln(3) as the annual growth rate in algorithmic progress per Ho et al. (2024), meaning A triples each year. Next recall
gR = S L g L + SE gE + SK gK . We take g L ≈ ln 3 from Epoch AI (2026); Whitfill and

28

Wu (2025) and gE ≈ ln(3) from You et al. (2026). gK was probably small until the rise
of coding agents but has since increased. Indeed OpenAI reported in the GPT-5.6
launch post in July 2026 that “over the past six months, the share of research compute devoted to internal coding inference grew 100-fold,” implying a much larger
gR at present. But since we do not know the spend shares on these factors, and
SK is likely still low relative to S L and SE , we assume gR = ln(3) for now. This
assumption is further justified by the fact that g A was estimated in 2024.
• ε R,C . We have almost no evidence for this parameter because AI uplift studies do
not report capability improvements in a form that maps cleanly to this elasticity.
• ε C,A ≈ 6.5. Define capabilities as the exponential of the Epoch Capabilities Index,
exp(ECI). Also recall the assumption that C = C ( A × T ) which implies ε C,A = ε C,T .
Thus we can get the elasticity of capabilities to algorithmic efficiency from the slope
of a regression of ECI on log(compute) across models using data from Epoch AI
which yields an estimate of roughly 6.5.11
Plugging in these values tells us that self-sustaining acceleration is achieved if ε R,C >
0.15. This is the increase in R&D effort per additional unit of ECI. For comparison, Claude
Opus 4.8 scores one ECI unit more than Claude Opus 4.7. Thus under our model, Anthropic would meet the self-sustaining acceleration condition if adopting Claude Opus
4.8 led to 15% higher research productivity than Opus 4.7. Note that the increase in research output per unit of AI capabilities tends to be smaller than the uplift for human
tasks from AI use, because labor only accounts for a fraction of all research tasks.
It is hard to say whether one unit of the ECI is worth 15% more research effort, but a
rough calculation based on the last two years of AI progress reassuringly suggests that the
returns to capabilities are currently lower than this threshold. Claude Opus 4.8 scores 16
ECI points more than Claude 3.7 Sonnet, which was released in February 2025 alongside
Claude Code. At the time, estimates for AI uplift on engineering tasks varied but were not
conclusively larger than 0.12 More recently, Anthropic engineers surveyed in the Claude
Mythos Preview system card reported a 4X uplift from Claude use (Anthropic, 2026). The
4X uplift is very likely to be an overestimate, but even if it were true it would imply a 9%
increase in productivity per unit of ECI, below the threshold for self-sustaining acceleration over this period.
Of course, these elasticities are likely increasing – the move from GPT-4 to GPT-5 led
to a much larger increase in research productivity than the move from GPT-1 to GPT2. The continual measurement of those elasticities is necessary for understanding the
current state of RSI. Understanding how and why ε R,C changes over time is therefore an
important research priority.13
11 Setting aside the scale-bias in algorithmic progress, discussed below.
12 For example, an influential study from Becker et al. (2025) found a negative impact of AI on engineering

productivity.
13 One promising direction here is to model automation as endogenous: as AI capabilities improve, which
research tasks do labs choose to automate, and how do those choices affect the aggregate responsiveness of
research effort to capabilities?

29

4.2 Arguments for and against acceleration
Given the uncertainty in the above calibration, we now turn to general qualitative arguments for and against acceleration, informed by our models and data.
Best evidence in favor of acceleration:
• AI systems are meaningfully contributing to AI progress. The Claude Mythos Preview system card reported a self-assessed productivity uplift of roughly 4X among
Anthropic researchers (although there are reasons to think this is likely overstated),
and a 40-hour time horizon at which Claude Mythos Preview beat human researchers
(Anthropic, 2026). Favaro and Clark (2026) assess the performance of human researchers versus Claude Code in making AI research decisions. In April 2026, Mythos
Preview beat humans 64% of the time, up from 50% for Claude models released in
2025. OpenAI reported in July 2026 that internal coding inference’s share of research
compute grew 100-fold in the prior six months, suggesting that the value of AI in
R&D has dramatically increased.
• In August 2025, experts and superforecasters (METR, 2025)14 predicted an 8–20%
chance that the growth rate of effective compute would triple by 2029. In May 2026,
Jack Clark predicted a 60% chance that by the end of 2028, there will be “an AI system powerful enough that it could autonomously build its own successor” (Clark,
2026).
Best evidence against acceleration:
• Compute bottlenecks could bind for multiple reasons. Algorithmic improvements
may require increases in training compute (Gundlach et al., 2025). Cognitive labor
increases may require increases in experimental compute (Whitfill and Wu, 2025).
Productivity growth may not be fast enough to support continued AI R&D investments, that is, we “run out of GDP” (Halperin, forthcoming).
• Autonomous contributions to algorithm optimization may quickly hit diminishing
returns. This has been widely observed informally and formalized in the applepicking model of AI R&D developed by Cunningham and Shetty (2026).
• Capabilities may depend on data. Millidge (2025) argues that “most algorithmic
progress is data progress”. This includes everything from better filtering of pretraining data to the substantial resources spent on post-training data. Pre-training
filtering seems to be a one-time boost, whereas post-training data might be supplied
more elastically and be amenable to automation. We are only beginning to learn
how to build better reinforcement learning environments, and AI systems could
help design future ones.
14 “Experts and superforecasters both find a three-fold acceleration of effective compute scale-up by 2029

plausible but unlikely, with experts giving it a median 20% chance and superforecasters 8%.”

30

Narrow capabilities acceleration before broad capabilities acceleration. It seems plausible that AI R&D agents, while effective at making concrete algorithmic progress as captured by benchmarks, might remain less effective at developing major breakthroughs that
enable models to learn efficiently in new environments, or develop more amorphous capabilities like ‘vision’ or ‘taste’. This idea would be captured by combining our models
in Sections 2.4 and 2.5 so that the feedback loop from narrow capabilities is helpful for
generating narrow algorithmic progress but not broad progress. Nonetheless, spillovers
from narrow to broad progress remain possible. For example, an advanced narrow system, in pursuit of benchmark optimization, may discover new capabilities, such as highly
sample-efficient algorithms able to update their weights during deployment, that quickly
turn narrow progress into broader progress.
Political and social barriers. Even if a self-sustaining acceleration is technically plausible, political and social barriers could stop it in its tracks. In America, at least 20 data
center projects were canceled in the first three months of 2026 due to local pushback;
$85 billion worth of projects have been canceled in the last three years (The Economist,
2026). Recent policy reactions to Mythos by the Trump administration, despite an earlier laissez-faire stance, also suggest placing greater weight on these barriers. If compute
scaling remains important, even minor frictions in model deployment will slow revenue
growth and further scaling.

4.3 Impacts of a capabilities acceleration on the world
A self-sustaining acceleration in AI progress differs from generic AI progress in speed:
it could compress generations of progress into short periods of time. Indeed, if selfsustaining progress were feasible, it is likely that the returns to increasing investment
in inputs like compute and data would be high, further increasing investment and the
pace of progress. We highlight several aspects of rapid progress that distinguish it from
gradual AI progress, and that may be especially important for understanding its social,
economic, and political consequences.
• Transition costs: It seems plausible that transition costs increase with the speed
of technological change. Labor markets are one such case: the costs of structural
transformation may rise with its speed, as some economists argue was the case with
the China Shock.
• Institutional inertia: In a world of rapidly accelerating capabilities growth, institutions broadly defined — regulatory capacity, democratic procedures, legal frameworks, infrastructure, and so on — might lag behind (Bostrom, 2014; Ord, 2020).
Rapid technological change might also grant political elites a temporary spike in de
facto power, which they could use to capture institutions.
• Asymmetric progress across domains: As noted, we see self-sustaining acceleration
in narrow capabilities as more likely in the near term than an acceleration in broad
capabilities. The former would likely be concentrated in tasks that are easy to verify
31

in closed loops, such as software development, games, mathematics, and related areas. This could create acute asymmetries in progress across domains. For example,
we may find solutions to long-standing puzzles in mathematics and breakthroughs
in computational chemistry that enable new materials, alongside sluggish progress
in less self-contained or messier domains.
• Power imbalances across firms and nation-states: Even model providers with relatively small gaps in technical skill could see large gaps open up in effective capabilities and power over the world. Imagine Anthropic or the US government having
access to capabilities that are vastly superior to those of any other actor.
• Greater misalignment risk: Misaligned AI might also create bigger risks under a
capabilities acceleration. Sudden increases in model capabilities would provide less
time for technical and social safeguards to be put in place.

4.4 Future Steps
There are several directions for future work that build off this note, some of which we are
actively pursuing:
• Empirically estimating the self-sustaining acceleration condition for the model with
economic feedback loops.
• Measuring the return to research off the balanced growth path.
• Combining models with multiple types of AI algorithms and capabilities (Sections 2.4
and 2.5).
• Distinguishing quality from quantity improvements in data and compute.
• Extending the model to multiple research sectors (software, hardware, data).
• Modeling research taste and vision in AI R&D.
• Endogenizing the decision to automate AI R&D.
• Incorporating directed technical change.
• Surveys and field experiments within AI frontier labs to improve estimates of the
key parameters in the model.
• Developing new ways to incentivize participation in prediction markets to produce
better forecasts of AI progress (Fradkin et al. (2026)).

32

R EFERENCES
Philippe Aghion, Benjamin F Jones, and Charles I Jones. Artificial intelligence and economic growth. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2017.
Anthropic. System card: Claude mythos preview. Technical report, Anthropic, April 2026. URL https:
//www-cdn.anthropic.com/08ab9158070959f88f296514c21b7facce6f52bc.pdf.
Joel Becker. Measuring the self-reported impact of early-2026 AI on technical worker productivity. METR,
2026. URL https://metr.org/blog/2026-05-11-ai-usage-survey/. Published May 11, 2026.
Joel Becker, Nath Rush, Beth Barnes, and David Rein. Measuring the impact of early-2025 ai on experienced
open-source developer productivity. 07 2025.
Nicholas Bloom, Charles I Jones, John Van Reenen, and Michael Webb. Are ideas getting harder to find?
American Economic Review, 110(4):1104–1144, 2020.
Nick Bostrom. Superintelligence: Paths, Dangers, Strategies. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2014.
Erik Brynjolfsson, Avinash Collis, Felix Eggers, Sophia Kazinnik, and David Nguyen. What is generative
AI worth? Technical report, Stanford Digital Economy Lab, 2026. URL https://digitaleconomy.sta
nford.edu/publication/what-is-generative-ai-worth/.
Alan Chan, Ranay Padarath, Joe Kwon, Hilary Greaves, and Markus Anderljung. Measuring ai r&d automation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.03992, 2026.
Paul Christiano. Takeoff speeds. The Sideways View, February 2018. URL https://sideways-view.com/
2018/02/24/takeoff-speeds/. Accessed 2026-06-27.
Jack Clark. Import AI 455: AI systems are about to start building themselves. Import AI newsletter, 2026.
URL https://importai.substack.com/p/import-ai-455-automating-ai-research. Published May
4, 2026.
Ben Cottier, Robi Rahman, Loredana Fattorini, Nestor Maslej, and David Owen. How much does it cost to
train frontier AI models? Epoch AI, 2024. URL https://epoch.ai/blog/how-much-does-it-cost-t
o-train-frontier-ai-models. Published June 3, 2024.
Tom Cunningham and Manish Shetty. An apple-picking model of AI R&D. tecunningham.github.io, 2026.
URL https://tecunningham.github.io/posts/2026-03-13-apple-picking-ai.html. Published
April 7, 2026.
Tom Davidson. What a compute-centric framework says about takeoff speeds. Technical report, Open
Philanthropy, 2023. URL https://www.openphilanthropy.org/research/what-a-compute-centric
-framework-says-about-takeoff-speeds/.
Tom Davidson and Thomas Houlden. How quick and big would a software intelligence explosion be?
2025. URL https://www.forethought.org/research/how-quick-and-big-would-a-software-intel
ligence-explosion-be. Accessed: 2026-06-27.
Tom Davidson, Basil Halperin, Thomas Houlden, and Anton Korinek. When does automating AI research
produce explosive growth? Feedback loops in innovation networks. NBER Working Paper 35155, National Bureau of Economic Research, April 2026. URL https://www.nber.org/papers/w35155.
Jean-Stanislas Denain and Cheryl Wu. Final training runs account for a minority of R&D compute spending.
Epoch AI, Gradient Updates, 2026. URL https://epoch.ai/gradient-updates/r-and-d-vs-trainin
g-compute. Published March 23, 2026.
AI Epoch. Key trends and figures in machine learning. Published online at epochai. org. Retrieved from:
https://epochai. org/trends, 2026.
Epoch AI. Epoch capabilities index (ECI). Epoch AI, 2025. URL https://epoch.ai/eci. Accessed June
2026.
Epoch AI. Data on AI companies. Epoch AI, 2026. URL https://epoch.ai/data/ai-companies. Accessed
June 2026.
Ege Erdil, Tamay Besiroglu, and Anson Ho. Estimating idea production: A methodological survey, 2024.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.10494.
Ege Erdil, Matthew Barnett, and Tamay Besiroglu. How to fully automate software engineering. Mechanize,
Inc. blog, May 2025. URL https://www.mechanize.work/blog/how-to-fully-automate-software-e
ngineering/. Accessed: 2026-06-05.
Daniel Eth and Tom Davidson. Will AI R&D automation cause a software intelligence explosion? Fore-

33

thought Research Report, mar 2025. URL https://www.forethought.org/research/will-ai-r-and
-d-automation-cause-a-software-intelligence-explosion.
Maryam Farboodi, Andrew Koh, and Anchi Xia. Data-driven automation. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2025.
Marina Favaro and Jack Clark. When AI builds itself. Anthropic, 2026. URL https://www.anthropic.co
m/institute/recursive-self-improvement. Accessed: 2026-06-08.
Andrey Fradkin, Brian Jabarian, and Andrew Koh. We need well-capitalized prediction markets for ai
impacts. Justified Posteriors, Substack, May 2026. URL https://empiricrafting.substack.com/p/we
-need-well-capitalized-prediction. Accessed 2026-06-27.
Irving John Good. Speculations concerning the first ultraintelligent machine. In Franz L. Alt and Morris
Rubinoff, editors, Advances in Computers, volume 6, pages 31–88. Elsevier, 1965. doi: 10.1016/S0065-245
8(08)60418-0.
Hans Gundlach, Alex Fogelson, Jayson Lynch, Ana Trisovic, Jonathan Rosenfeld, Anmol Sandhu, and Neil
Thompson. On the origin of algorithmic progress in AI, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.216
22.
Basil Halperin. Running out of gdp: Straight lines to long timelines. forthcoming.
Robin Hanson. Economics of the singularity. iEEE SpEctrum, 45(6):45–50, 2008.
Anson Ho. The least understood driver of AI progress. Epoch AI, Gradient Updates, 2026. URL https:
//epoch.ai/gradient- updates/the- least- understood- driver- of- ai- progress. Published
February 25, 2026.
Anson Ho and Parker Whitfill. The software intelligence explosion debate needs experiments. Epoch AI,
Gradient Updates, 2025. URL https://epoch.ai/gradient-updates/the-software-intelligence-e
xplosion-debate-needs-experiments.
Anson Ho, Tamay Besiroglu, Ege Erdil, David Owen, Robi Rahman, Zifan Carl Guo, David Atkinson, Neil
Thompson, and Jaime Sevilla. Algorithmic progress in language models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.or
g/abs/2403.05812.
Anson Ho, Jean-Stanislas Denain, David Atanasov, Samuel Albanie, and Rohin Shah. A Rosetta Stone for
AI benchmarks, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.00193. Epoch AI; underlies the Epoch
Capabilities Index (ECI).
Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza Rutherford,
Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, Tom Hennigan, Eric Noland,
Katie Millican, George van den Driessche, Bogdan Damoc, Aurelia Guy, Simon Osindero, Karen Simonyan, Erich Elsen, Jack W. Rae, Oriol Vinyals, and Laurent Sifre. Training compute-optimal large
language models, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.15556.
Benjamin Jones. Artificial intelligence in research and development. Technical report, National Bureau of
Economic Research, 2025.
Charles I. Jones. R&D-based models of economic growth. Journal of Political Economy, 103(4):759–784, 1995.
doi: 10.1086/262002.
Charles I. Jones. A.i. and our economic future. NBER Working Paper 34779, National Bureau of Economic
Research, 2026. Issued January 2026, revised June 2026.
Thomas Kwa, Ben West, Joel Becker, Amy Deng, Katharyn Garcia, Max Hasin, Sami Jawhar, Megan Kinniment, Nate Rush, Sydney Von Arx, Ryan Bloom, Thomas Broadley, Haoxing Du, Brian Goodrich, Nikola
Jurkovic, Luke Harold Miles, Seraphina Nix, Tao Lin, Neev Parikh, David Rein, Lucas Jun Koba Sato,
Hjalmar Wijk, Daniel M. Ziegler, Elizabeth Barnes, and Lawrence Chan. Measuring AI ability to complete
long tasks, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.14499. METR.
METR. Forecasting the impacts of AI R&D acceleration: Results of a pilot study. METR, 2025. URL
https://metr.org/blog/2025-08-20-forecasting-impacts-of-ai-acceleration/. Published
August 20, 2025.
Beren Millidge. Most algorithmic progress is data progress. beren.io, 2025. URL https://www.beren.io/2
025-08-02-Most-Algorithmic-Progress-is-Data-Progress/. Published August 2, 2025.
Joel Mokyr. The Gifts of Athena: Historical Origins of the Knowledge Economy. Princeton University Press,
Princeton, NJ, 2002.
Jacob Morrison, Noah A. Smith, and Emma Strubell. The hidden cost of thinking: Energy use and environmental impact of lms beyond pretraining, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.01158.

34

Toby Ord. The Precipice: Existential Risk and the Future of Humanity. Hachette Books, New York, 2020.
Robi Rahman and David Owen. The training compute of notable AI models has been doubling roughly
every six months. Epoch AI, Data Insights, 2024. URL https://epoch.ai/data-insights/compute-t
rend-post-2010. Published June 19, 2024.
George P Richardson. Problems with causal-loop diagrams. System dynamics review, 2(2):158–170, 1986.
Chenglei Si, Diyi Yang, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. Can LLMs generate novel research ideas? a largescale human study with 100+ NLP researchers. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR), 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.04109.
The Economist. America’s data-centre backlash puts the ai boom at risk. The Economist, June 2026. URL
https://www.economist.com/business/2026/06/23/americas-data-centre-backlash-puts-the-a
i-boom-at-risk.
Philip Trammell and Anton Korinek. Economic growth under transformative AI. NBER Working Paper
31815, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2025. Originally issued 2023, revised 2026; forthcoming,
Annual Review of Economics.
Dhruv Trehan and Paras Chopra. Why LLMs aren’t scientists yet: Lessons from four autonomous research
attempts, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.03315.
Pablo Villalobos and David Atkinson. Trading off compute in training and inference. Report, Epoch AI, July
2023. URL https://epoch.ai/publications/trading-off-compute-in-training-and-inference.
Parker Whitfill and Cheryl Wu. Will compute bottlenecks prevent an intelligence explosion?, 2025. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.23181.
Parker Whitfill, Ben Snodin, and Joel Becker. Forecasting AI time horizon under compute slowdowns, 2025.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.19492.
Ivan Yotzov, Jose Maria Barrero, Nicholas Bloom, Philip Bunn, Steven J. Davis, Kevin M. Foster, Aaron Jalca,
Brent H. Meyer, Paul Mizen, Michael A. Navarrete, Pawel Smietanka, Gregory Thwaites, and Ben Zhe
Wang. Firm data on AI. NBER Working Paper 34836, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2026.
Josh You. Most of OpenAI’s 2024 compute went to experiments. Epoch AI, Data Insights, 2025. URL
https://epoch.ai/data-insights/openai-compute-spend. Published October 10, 2025.
Josh You, Venkat Somala, Yafah Edelman, and Luke Emberson. Global ai computing capacity is doubling
every 7 months, 2026. URL https://epoch.ai/data-insights/ai-chip-production. Accessed:
2026-06-28.
Eliezer Yudkowsky. Creating friendly ai 1.0: The analysis and design of benevolent goal architectures. The
Singularity Institute, San Francisco, USA, 2001.
Eliezer Yudkowsky. Recursive self-improvement. LessWrong, 2008.

35

A PPENDIX
A S CALE -D EPENDENT A LGORITHMIC P ROGRESS
Since algorithmic progress is usually not directly observable, it is typically estimated as
the increase in capabilities not explained by increases in training compute, just as TFP
is estimated by the Solow residual. That is, if we know (from a “scaling law”) that in
the absence of algorithmic progress some index of AI capabilities C would track training
compute T, it is conventional to propose the model
C = A·T

(6)

and calculate A as C/T. Using a model like our “baseline model” in Section 2.2, the
resulting time series for A, in combination with a time series for research inputs R and
the semi-endogenous AI R&D function, can then be used to generate a prediction for how
fast algorithms would advance after the automation of AI R&D.
Gundlach et al. (2025) show conclusively that model (6) is misspecified because algorithmic progress in AI development to date has been largely biased toward large scales.
For an extreme case of large-scale-biased algorithmic progress, consider instead the model
C = min( A, T ) · T.

(7)

Here, algorithmic improvements proportionally advance AI capabilities as long as there
is the training compute to leverage them (i.e., here, as long as T > A). If we stopped
scaling the compute, however, capabilities would ultimately stagnate (here, at T 2 ). Likewise, even if automating AI R&D yields a leap in the quality of the algorithms available,
under (7) this will not deliver arbitrarily large advances in AI capabilities until we have
accumulated the training compute to leverage these algorithms.
Another potential explanation for Gundlach et al.’s finding, however, is that we have
been developing large-scale-biased algorithms precisely because we have been scaling
compute. Indeed, we might imagine living in a somewhat different world in which we
knew exactly what architectures would take us to superintelligence but were simply too
compute-constrained to make efficient use of them. Why don’t we live in that world?
One answer is that we have no incentive to discover such algorithms—and would not be
able to validate them if we did—in a world in which we are compute-constrained. This
also suggests that if we faced a long-term compute constraint, or if an AI model were
tasked with recursively self-improving on fixed compute, we might develop algorithms
that made ever better use of “small” training runs—as academic labs do to some extent today. That is, rapid RSI may still be feasible, but only via some kind of “directed technical
change”.

36

